# DREEM Vectoring Module

Contributor: Matty Allan

## Purpose

- Convert mapped reads into mutation vectors

## Interface

### Input Files

- [=1] `{reference}.fasta` Sequence record file that contains the names and sequences of all references.
- [≥1] `{sample}/{construct}.bam` Sequence alignment map file(s) generated by `bowtie2` and `samtools view` during the alignment step.
    - There must be one directory for each sample, and its name must be `{sample}`. (DREEM will infer the sample name from the name of the BAM file and use that name for the mutation vector files.)
    - In each directory, there must be one file `{construct}.bam` per construct (sequence name).
    - The BAM file must have been generated using `bowtie2` with the `-xeq` flag (to record matches and mismatches as `=` and `X`, respectively, instead of both as `M`). Ideally, the BAM file was generated by aligning reads to reference.fasta. If a different FASTA file is used, any additional or missing references will be ignored, and every reference that appears in both files must have exactly the same sequence in both files.
- [≥1] `{sample}/{construct}.bam.bai` An index for each BAM file(s) generated by `samtools index` during the alignment step. There must be one for each BAM file, located in the same directory as the corresponding BAM file and named `{sample}/{construct}.bam.bai`.

### Output Files

- [=1] `dreem-vectoring/output/{reference}/{first}-{last}/{sample}/{construct}_report.txt` Report containing the `Sample Name`, `Ref Name`, `First` and `Last` coordinates (inclusive) of the mutational profile, `Ref Seq` (the entire sequence, not just the region between the First and Last coordinates), `Num Batches`, `Num Vectors`, `Speed (vec/s)`, `Duration (s)`, time at which the processing `Began` and `Ended`, and `Checksums (md5)` for all of the mutation vector files.
- [≥0] `dreem-vectoring/output/{reference}/{first}-{last}/{sample}/{construct}_vectors.orc` Mutation vectors stored in Apache ORC format. If read-level parallelization is turned on, then one file is written by each batch process (the number is arbitrary); otherwise, a single file (`batch_0.orc`) is written.

### Command-line usage

 `dreem-vectoring [-c ref first last]* [-p ref fwd rev]* [--fill] [-P profiles/reads/off/AUTO] reference.fasta sample/construct.bam [sample2.bam ...]`

- `dreem-vectoring`: Wrapper for `dreem-vectoring` function in `dreem/vectoring/run.py`.
- [≥0] `-c ref first last`: First and last coordinates for reference ref (creates one mutational profile); using 0 for last is shorthand for the last coordinate of the sequnce, -1 for the second-to-last, and so on.
- [≥0] `-p ref fwd rev`: Forward and reverse primers for reference ref (creates one mutational profile)
- [≤1] `-fill`: For every reference in `reference.fasta` that was not explicitly specified using a `c` or `p` option, create a mutational profile for the entire sequence. Note: if none of `c`, `p` or `-fill` are given, then no mutational profiles will be generated.
- [≤1] `-P`: Parallelize the processing of mutational `profiles` or process each profile in series and parallelize processing `reads` within each profile, turn all paralleization `off`, or (default) `auto`matically choose "reads" if processing 1 profile, otherwise "profiles".
- [=1] `reference.fasta`: The reference names and sequences.
- [≥1] `{sample}/{construct}.bam`: The aligned reads from the sample(s).
